Add ApolloPagination to the DocC generation project (#262)
apollographql/apollo-ios-dev: docs/source/pagination/introduction.mdx

- Watching paginated data
- Forward, reverse, and bidirectional pagination support
- Multi-query pagination support
- Support for custom model types

Apollo Pagination provides two classes to interact with paginated endpoints: `GraphQLQueryPager` and `AsyncGraphQLQueryPager`. They have very similar APIs, but the latter supports `async`/`await` for use in asynchronous contexts.

## Using a `GraphQLQueryPager`

The `GraphQLQueryPager` class is intended to be a simple, flexible, and powerful way to interact with paginated data. While it has a standard initializer, it is recommended to use the convenience initializers, which simplify the process of creating a `GraphQLQueryPager` instance. The convenience initializers are static methods on the `GraphQLQueryPager` class, prefixed with `make`.

For example, in order to initialize a `GraphQLQueryPager` that paginates a single query in the forward direction with a cursor-based pagination, you can use the `makeQueryPager` method:

```swift
let initialQuery = MyQuery(first: 10, after: nil)
let pager = GraphQLQueryPager.makeQueryPager(
    client: client,
    initialQuery: initialQuery,
    pageResolver: { page, paginationDirection in

>         // As we only want to support forward pagination, we can return `nil` for reverse pagination

Reviewer: For the convenience functions that only support single direction paging, can we just omit the pagination direction from the `pageResolver` closure signature? It should only be needed for bidirectional paging, right?

Author: Discussed this on our call just now – but this can be an improvement for 0.2.x

We could do it by declaring `ForwardPageInfo` and `ReversePageInfo` protocols, and then declaring the convenience functions around those protocols.

## Subscribing to results

The `GraphQLQueryPager` class can fetch data, but the caller must subscribe to the results in order to receive the data. A `subscribe` method is provided which takes a closure that is called whenever the pager fetches a new page of data. The `subscribe` method is a convenience method that ensures that the closure is called on the main thread.

```swift
// Guaranteed to run on the main thread
pager.subscribe { result in
    switch result {
    case .success(let data):
        // Handle the data
    case .failure(let error):
        // Handle the error
    }
}
```

The `GraphQLQueryPager` is also a Combine `Publisher`. As such, all `Publisher` methods are available, such as `sink`, `assign`, `map`, `filter`, and so on.

```swift
// Can run on any thread
pager.sink { result in
    switch result {
    case .success(let data):
        // Handle the data
    case .failure(let error):
        // Handle the error
    }
}
```

## Fetching Data

The `GraphQLQueryPager` class provides several methods to fetch paginated data: `fetch`, `refetch`, `loadNext`, `loadPrevious`, and `loadAll`.

> `fetch`: Fetches the first page of data. Must be called before `loadNext` or `loadPrevious` can be called.
> `refetch`: Cancels all ongoing fetch operations and resets the pager to its initial state. Fetches the first page of data.
> `loadNext`: Fetches the next page of data. Can only be called after `fetch` has been called.
> `loadPrevious`: Fetches the previous page of data. Can only be called after `fetch` has been called.
> `loadAll`: Fetches all pages of data. If no initial page is detected, it will first call `fetch` to fetch the first page of data. Will continue to fethc all pages until a `PageInfo` object indicates that there are no more pages to fetch. This function is compatible with forward, reverse, and bidirectional pagination.

Reviewer: I think these need to be bulleted or else they will all appear as one paragraph. Also had a typo!

```suggestion
- `fetch`: Fetches the first page of data. Must be called before `loadNext` or `loadPrevious` can be called.
- `refetch`: Cancels all ongoing fetch operations and resets the pager to its initial state. Fetches the first page of data.
- `loadNext`: Fetches the next page of data. Can only be called after `fetch` has been called.
- `loadPrevious`: Fetches the previous page of data. Can only be called after `fetch` has been called.
- `loadAll`: Fetches all pages of data. If no initial page is detected, it will first call `fetch` to fetch the first page of data. Will continue to fetch all pages until a `PageInfo` object indicates that there are no more pages to fetch. This function is compatible with forward, reverse, and bidirectional pagination.
```

```swift
// Can run on any thread
pager.sink { result in
    switch result {
    case .success(let data):
        // Handle the data
    case .failure(let error):
        // Handle the error
    }
}
```

## Fetching Data

The `GraphQLQueryPager` class provides several methods to fetch paginated data: `fetch`, `refetch`, `loadNext`, `loadPrevious`, and `loadAll`.

- `fetch`: Fetches the first page of data. Must be called before `loadNext` or `loadPrevious` can be called.
- `refetch`: Cancels all ongoing fetch operations and resets the pager to its initial state. Fetches the first page of data.
- `loadNext`: Fetches the next page of data. Can only be called after `fetch` has been called.
- `loadPrevious`: Fetches the previous page of data. Can only be called after `fetch` has been called.
- `loadAll`: Fetches all pages of data. If no initial page is detected, it will first call `fetch` to fetch the first page of data. Will continue to fetch all pages until a `PageInfo` object indicates that there are no more pages to fetch. This function is compatible with forward, reverse, and bidirectional pagination.

## Cancelling ongoing requests

> The `GraphQLQueryPager` class provides a `cancel` method, which can be used to cancel any ongoing fetch operations as well as cease all subscriptions. Once cancelled, the pager's state is reset. Any subscriber that was subscribed to the pager will receive a termination signal, and will no longer receive updates. After calling the `cancel` method, you msut resubscribe to the pager in order to receive updates.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `GraphQLQueryPager` class provides a `cancel` method, which can be used to cancel any ongoing fetch operations as well as cease all subscriptions. Once cancelled, the pager's state is reset. Any subscriber that was subscribed to the pager will receive a completion signal, and will no longer receive updates. After calling the `cancel` method the pager is invalid. You will need to create a new pager in order to receive updates again.
```

---
title: Pagination
---

Apollo Pagination provides a convenient and easy way to interact with and watch paginated APIs. It provides a flexible and powerful way to interact with paginated data, and works with both cursor-based and offset-based pagination. Its key features include:

- Watching paginated data
- Forward, reverse, and bidirectional pagination support
- Multi-query pagination support
- Support for custom model types

> Apollo Pagination provides two classes to interact with paginated endpoints: `GraphQLQueryPager` and `AsyncGraphQLQueryPager`. They have very similar APIs, but the latter is designed for use in asynchronous contexts. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Apollo Pagination provides two classes to interact with paginated endpoints: `GraphQLQueryPager` and `AsyncGraphQLQueryPager`. They have very similar APIs, but the latter supports `async/await` for use in asynchronous contexts. 
```

## Using a `GraphQLQueryPager`

> The `GraphQLQueryPager` class is intended to be a simple, flexible, and powerful way to interact with paginated data. While it has a standard initializer, it is recommended to use the convenience initializers, which simplify the process of creating a `GraphQLQueryPager` instance. The convenience initializers are defined as static methods on the `GraphQLQueryPager` class, prefixed with `make`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `GraphQLQueryPager` class is intended to be a simple, flexible, and powerful way to interact with paginated data. While it has a standard initializer, it is recommended to use the convenience initializers, which simplify the process of creating a `GraphQLQueryPager` instance. The convenience initializers are static methods on the `GraphQLQueryPager` class, prefixed with `make`.
```

If you want to use a custom response type, you can provide a `transform` closure when initializing the `GraphQLQueryPager` instance. This closure is called whenever the pager fetches a new page of data, and is used to transform the raw response into the desired response type. 

```swift
struct Person {
    let id: String
    let name: String
}

let pager = GraphQLQueryPager.makeForwardCursorQueryPager(
    client: apolloClient,
    queryProvider: { page in
        MyQuery(first: 10, after: page?.cursor ?? .none)
    },
    extractPageInfo: { data in
        CursorBasedPagination.Forward(
            hasNext: data.values.pageInfo.hasNextPage ?? false,
            endCursor: data.values.pageInfo.endCursor
        )
    },
    transform: { data in 
        data.values.nodes.map { Person(id: $0.id, name: $0.name) }
    }
)
```

> In this example, the `GraphQLQueryPager` instance is initialized with a `transform` closure that transforms the raw response into an array of `Person` objects. Alternatively, we can make use of the `GraphQLQueryPager`'s `map` method to achieve the same result:

Reviewer: I think we need to make it clear that this `transform` will be called on the `data` for each page query's response sequentially and then the arrays will be concatenated together.

And alternatively, you can use the function with the `transform` signature `([PaginatedQuery.Data], InitialQuery.Data, [PaginatedQuery.Data]) throws -> Model` to get all of the page data at once and manually build whatever data structure you want. (With a quick example of what this looks like as well.)

```swift
pager.map { data in 
    data.values.nodes.map { Person(id: $0.id, name: $0.name) }
}.sink { result in
    switch result {
    case .success(let people):
        // Handle the people
    case .failure(let error):
        // Handle the error
    }
}
```

## Fetching Data

The `GraphQLQueryPager` class provides several methods to fetch paginated data: `fetch`, `refetch`, `loadNext`, `loadPrevious`, and `loadAll`. 

> The `fetch` method is used to fetch the first page of data and must be called before `loadNext` or `loadPrevious` can be called. The `refetch` method is used to refetch the first page of data, and additionally resets the pager to its initial state. The `loadNext` method is used to fetch the next page of data, and the `loadPrevious` method is used to fetch the previous page of data. The `loadAll` method is used to fetch all pages of data. 

Reviewer: Explain that `loadAll` will continue to fetch pages until the pageInfo returns `hasNext = false`.

## Cancelling a Pager

> The `GraphQLQueryPager` class provides a `cancel` method, which can be used to cancel any ongoing fetch operations as well as cease any watcher subscriptions. Once cancelled, the pager's state is reset. Any subscriber that was subscribed to the pager will remain subscribed and will continue to receive updates. 

Reviewer: > Any subscriber that was subscribed to the pager will remain subscribed and will continue to receive updates.

If the watchers have been canceled, what updates would they receive. This is unclear to me.

I wonder if on `cancel`, we should send a termination signal to the subscribers?

Reviewer: Hmmm I see. In FRP, I think the most common pattern is that a `cancel()` should terminate the publisher and dispose of all subscriptions. I'm concerned that deviating from that might cause confusion.

For the case of `refetch`, we don't want to do that of course, but in my mind, that means `refetch` should be calling a private function that cancels the internal network calls and existing watchers without terminating the publisher stream. `refetch` is managing some internal state to begin a refetch, but the subscribers will continue to get events because the pager itself isn't cancelled. While `cancel` should actually cancel the pager.

Especially considering the pager itself actually conforms to `Publisher`, I think `cancel` should do what you expect cancelling an FRP stream would do.

Author: Hmm...

I wonder how we would want to disambiguate this, and whether this is worth doing prior to first public release. What are your thoughts here?

Reviewer: I mean, this is an 0.1 release, so we are allowed to make breaking changes. But this is a pretty significantly breaking change...

I don't think it would be too hard to disambiguate though. Let's chat about this one.

## Error handling

> Network errors are exposed to the caller via the `Result` type. Usage errors are thrown as `Error` types or exposed as callbacks in each fetch method. 

Reviewer: I know what you are talking about here because we discussed it. But I think this needs a little more detail.

Clarity on the difference between network errors and usage errors as well as maybe a code snippet showing where they show up.

- Watching paginated data
- Forward, reverse, and bidirectional pagination support
- Multi-query pagination support
- Support for custom model types

Apollo Pagination provides two classes to interact with paginated endpoints: `GraphQLQueryPager` and `AsyncGraphQLQueryPager`. They have very similar APIs, but the latter supports `async`/`await` for use in asynchronous contexts.

## Using a `GraphQLQueryPager`

The `GraphQLQueryPager` class is intended to be a simple, flexible, and powerful way to interact with paginated data. While it has a standard initializer, it is recommended to use the convenience initializers, which simplify the process of creating a `GraphQLQueryPager` instance. The convenience initializers are static methods on the `GraphQLQueryPager` class, prefixed with `make`.

For example, in order to initialize a `GraphQLQueryPager` that paginates a single query in the forward direction with a cursor-based pagination, you can use the `makeForwardCursorQueryPager` method:

```swift

> let pager = GraphQLQueryPager.makeForwardCursorQueryPager(

Reviewer: We'll need to update this with the new functions.

    client: apolloClient,
    queryProvider: { page in
        MyQuery(first: 10, after: page?.cursor ?? .none)
    },
    extractPageInfo: { data in
        CursorBasedPagination.Forward(
            hasNext: data.values.pageInfo.hasNextPage ?? false,
            endCursor: data.values.pageInfo.endCursor
        )
    }
)
```

In this example, the `GraphQLQueryPager` instance is initialized with a closure that provides the query to be executed, and another closure that extracts the pagination information from the query result. The `GraphQLQueryPager` instance can then be used to fetch the paginated data, and to watch for changes to the paginated data.

Alternatively, we can create a forward-paginating offset-based `GraphQLQueryPager` instance using the `makeForwardOffsetQueryPager` method:

```swift

> let pager = GraphQLQueryPager.makeForwardOffsetQueryPager(

Reviewer: And this
